---
layout: post
title: "A Good Toy"
date: 2020-09-24 19:00:00
categories: design, musings
---
>To design a good puzzle, first build a good toy.  
>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;[_-Scott Kim_](http://www.scottkim.com.previewc40.carrierzone.com/thinkinggames/whatisapuzzle/index.html)

By now we've collected a body of best practices for crafting puzzle games:
- A good puzzle game thoroughly explores a specific mechanic or idea.
- Each puzzle teaches something new about that mechanic.
- All information needed to solve a puzzle is immediately and obviously communicated. The only thing standing between the player and their objective is their understanding of the mechanics.
- Never block the player with a single difficult puzzle. They should always have several they could tackle at any time.

These and many more are important guidelines covered in depth elsewhere. But a concept I don't often see explored is the notion of a puzzle first and foremost as a toy.

You can evaluate a puzzle game's toy by examining how the game would play with the levels and goals removed. Throw the player in an barebones stage with no objective. Is this still enjoyable? Interesting? What can they learn and discover just from playing around? How satisfying is this process?

Think about what this looks like for a game like Portal. In an empty level, you could place one portal on the ceiling and another on the wall in front of you, look down at yourself, then walk through the portal and drop down to where you just were. You could place one in the floor and one on the ceiling and fall forever. Devoid of an objective, Portal's mechanics are still a joy to tinker with.

Now contrast this to Stephen's Sausage Roll. In an empty level, you could move some sausages around with a fork. Maybe you figure out you can spear a sausage by pressing it against a wall? Stephen's Sausage Roll is a fantastic, meticulously designed game. But its mechanics don't have the same toy-like properties as Portal.

The quality of a puzzle's toy directly correlates to how 'mind-bending' the puzzles feel. When I solve a puzzle in Portal, I feel like I'm breaking the laws of the universe. Like I'm wrapping my mind around a completely different way of thinking. When I solve a puzzle in Stephen's Sausage Roll, I just feel really smart. Still great, but not quite the same.

A puzzle's toy can also make the difference between a puzzle game that feels like it's for a hardcore audience, and one that feels more mainstream. This distinction doesn't just come down to the difficulty of the puzzles. A hardcore puzzle game often has puzzles and nothing else, and frequently puzzles based on mechanics that wouldn't be much fun to experiment with devoid of a goal. A puzzle game with mainstream appeal can be just as challenging and explore mechanics and ideas in same way. But such a puzzle game is practically required to have a good toy.

Put another way: A good toy means a good hook.

I'll examine a few puzzle games I've played and evaluate how they function as a toy. Bear in mind, these are all _outstanding_ games, regardless of the critique I'm about to lay out. They're among the best puzzle games I've ever played, and even those that lack a good toy are still well worth playing.

In discussing them, I'm going to necessarily spoil some details about each game.


## Portal

Portal is the best example of a toy I know of. Throw a player in an empty room with a portal gun, and they will immediately start experimenting and trying to wrap their head around it.

A huge part of the appeal of this toy hinges on a few key details:
1. The game plays in first person
2. You can see through placed portals
3. Momentum and movement is preserved between portals, as if a rift between the two locations in space truly exists

Remove any of these details and it becomes significantly less mind bending:
1. [Third-person Portal](https://portal.wecreatestuff.com/portal.php) exists, and it's markedly less viscerally interesting to play with
2. Half the joy of portals is peeking through to the other side and seeing what's there, or seeing yourself from a different angle. Remove this, and suddenly the two locations in space don't feel seamlessly connected. You can set _Portal Render Depth_ to 0 in the settings to get a feel for how much less satisfying this is.
3. If the ability to look through portals makes them visually convincing, then conservation of movement and momentum makes them feel physically convincing. It also makes entire classes of interesting puzzles possible (for example, flings).


## Braid

Braid's time travel mechanics are a great toy.

Like Portal, the toy-like feeling of Braid's mechanics hinge largely on the aesthetic presentation. 

Good toy. Again, depends heavily on aesthetics, namely the music and sound playing in reverse (as well as slowed/sped up depending on the situation), and complex particle effects and visual details moving backwards. Also the fluidity and seamlessness of the mechanic's execution, and the ability to adjust rewind/fastforward speed.


## FEZ

Okay toy. Aesthetically interesting, although not as fun to play with by itself. Takes a while to get to the toy.


## Antichamber

More a collection of toys around a central theme. But some are great toys.


## The Swapper

Not a great toy, but there's a little bit there.


## Snakebird

No toy. Aesthetics are good, but very mobile-esque. Can lead people to think this game will play like a much more casual game than it actual is. Despite it's childish facade, it is a hardcore puzzle game among the ranks of the Stephen's Sausage Rolls of the world.


## The Witness

Basically no toy. The environmental puzzles have the marginal feeling of a toy, but hardly.


## Stephen's Sausage Roll

No toy. Also not great aesthetics.

The one aesthetic detail I love is how each puzzle is baked into the overworld, and how the rest of the overworld crumbles away when you enter a puzzle, and returns when you complete it successfully.


## Baba Is You

Outstanding toy. Remarkable because it doesn't lean on aesthetics.

